High Middle Ages - Wikipedia



 CentralNotice 


High Middle Ages

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia



Jump to navigation
Jump to search


Period of European history between 1000 and 1250 AD
.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinner{display:flex;flex-direction:column}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trow{display:flex;flex-direction:row;clear:left;flex-wrap:wrap;width:100%;box-sizing:border-box}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsingle{margin:1px;float:left}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .theader{clear:both;font-weight:bold;text-align:center;align-self:center;background-color:transparent;width:100%}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbcaption{background-color:transparent}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-left{text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-right{text-align:right}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .text-align-center{text-align:center}@media all and (max-width:720px){.mw-parser-output .tmulti .thumbinner{width:100%!important;box-sizing:border-box;max-width:none!important;align-items:center}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trow{justify-content:center}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsingle{float:none!important;max-width:100%!important;box-sizing:border-box;text-align:center}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .tsingle .thumbcaption{text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .tmulti .trow>.thumbcaption{text-align:center}}High Middle AgesEurope and Mediterranean regionLarge mapEurope and the Mediterranean region, c. 1190



British Isles
.mw-parser-output .legend{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .legend-color{display:inline-block;min-width:1.25em;height:1.25em;line-height:1.25;margin:1px 0;text-align:center;border:1px solid black;background-color:transparent;color:black}.mw-parser-output .legend-text{}  Lordship of Ireland
  Principality of Wales
  Kingdom of England
  Kingdom of Scotland
  Earldom of Orkney (Norway)
  Kingdom of Mann and the Isles (Norway)
Northern Europe
  Kingdom of Norway (872–1397)
  Kingdom of Sweden
  Kingdom of Denmark
  Terra Mariana
  Grand Duchy of Lithuania
Eastern Europe
  Principalities of Polotsk
  Territory of Novgorod
  Kievan Rus'
  Viatka

  Kama-Bulgarians
  Cumans or Polovtsians
  Kingdom of Poland
  Kingdom of Hungary
  Prussia
Iberian Peninsula
  Kingdom of Portugal
  Kingdom of León
  Kingdom of Castile
  Kingdom of Navarre
  Crown of Aragon
Central Europe
  Kingdom of Germany
  Kingdom of Bohemia
  Kingdom of France
  Holy Roman Empire




Italian Peninsula
  Kingdom of Italy
  Corsica
  Sardinia
  Kingdom of Sicily
  Republic of Venice
The Balkans
  Kingdom of Croatia
  Kingdom of Serbia
  Second Bulgarian Empire
  Byzantine Empire
  Kingdom of Cyprus
Caucasia
  Kingdom of Armenia
  Khazar Empire
  Alania
  Kassogs
  Kingdom of Georgia
  Atabegs of Azerbaijan
Near East
  Seljuks of Rum
  Dominion of Shaharmen
  Kurdistan
  Ayyubid dynasty
  Principality of Antioch
  County of Tripoli
North Africa
  Almohad Caliphate



The Crusades
  (Solid Line) Second Crusade of Louis VII and Conrad III
  (Line and dot) Third Crusade of Richard I, Phillip II, and Fredrick I



Small map
Central EuropeGuelf, Hohenstaufen, and Ascanian domains in Germany about 1176




   Duchy of Saxony
   Margravate of Brandenburg
   Duchy of Franconia




   Duchy of Swabia
   Duchy of Bavaria




The High Middle Ages, or High Medieval Period, was the period of European history that lasted from around 1000 to 1250 AD. The High Middle Ages were preceded by the Early Middle Ages and were followed by the Late Middle Ages, which ended around 1500 AD (by historiographical convention).[1]
Key historical trends of the High Middle Ages include the rapidly increasing population of Europe, which brought about great social and political change from the preceding era, and the Renaissance of the 12th century, including the first developments of rural exodus and of urbanization. By 1250, the robust population increase had greatly benefited the European economy, which reached levels that would not be seen again in some areas until the 19th century. That trend faltered during the Late Middle Ages because of a series of calamities, most notably the Black Death, but also numerous wars as well as economic stagnation.
From around 780,[citation needed] Europe saw the last of the barbarian invasions[2] and became more socially and politically organized.[3] The Carolingian Renaissance stimulated scientific and philosophical activity in Northern Europe. The first universities started operating in Bologna, Paris, Oxford, Salamanca, Cambridge and Modena. The Vikings settled in the British Isles, France and elsewhere, and Norse Christian kingdoms started developing in their Scandinavian homelands. The Magyars ceased their expansion in the 10th century, and by the year 1000, a Christian Kingdom of Hungary had become a recognized state in Central Europe that was forming alliances with regional powers. With the brief exception of the Mongol invasions in the 13th century, major nomadic incursions ceased. The powerful Byzantine Empire of the Macedonian and Komnenos dynasties gradually gave way to the resurrected Serbia and Bulgaria and to a successor crusader state (1204 to 1261), who continually fought each other until the end of the Latin Empire. The Byzantine Empire was reestablished in 1261 with the recapture of Constantinople from the Latins, though it was no longer a major power and would continue to falter through the 14th century, with remnants lasting until the mid 15th century.
In the 11th century, populations north of the Alps began a more intensive settlement, targeting "new" lands, some of which areas had reverted to wilderness after the end of the Western Roman Empire. In what historian Charles Higounet called the "great clearances",[4] Europeans cleared and cultivated some of the vast forests and marshes that lay across much of the continent. At the same time, settlers moved beyond the traditional boundaries of the Frankish Empire to new frontiers beyond the Elbe River, which tripled the size of Germany in the process. The Catholic Church, which reached the peak of its political power around then, called armies from across Europe to a series of Crusades against the Seljuk Turks. The crusaders occupied the Holy Land and founded the Crusader States in the Levant. Other wars led to the Northern Crusades. The Christian kingdoms took much of the Iberian Peninsula from Muslim control, and the Normans conquered southern Italy, all part of the major population increases and the resettlement patterns of the era.
The High Middle Ages produced many different forms of intellectual, spiritual and artistic works. The age also saw the rise of ethnocentrism, which evolved later into modern national identities in most of Europe, the ascent of the great Italian city-states and the rise and fall of the Islamic civilization of Al-Andalus. The rediscovery of the works of Aristotle, at first indirectly through Medieval Jewish and Islamic Philosophy,[5][6][7] led Maimonides, Avicenna, Averroes, Thomas Aquinas and other thinkers of the period to expand Scholasticism, a combination of Judeo-Islamic and Catholic ideologies with the ancient philosophy. For much of this period, Constantinople remained Europe's most populous city, and Byzantine art reached a peak in the 12th century. In architecture, many of the most notable Gothic cathedrals were built or completed around this period.
The Crisis of the Late Middle Ages began at the start of the 14th century and marked the end of the period.

Contents

1 Historical events and politics

1.1 Great Britain and Ireland
1.2 Spain, Portugal, and Italy
1.3 Scandinavia
1.4 France and Germany
1.5 Georgia
1.6 Hungary
1.7 Lithuania
1.8 Poland
1.9 Southeastern Europe
1.10 Climate and agriculture
1.11 The rise of chivalry


2 Religion

2.1 Christian Church
2.2 Crusades

2.2.1 Military orders


2.3 Scholasticism
2.4 Golden age of monasticism
2.5 Mendicant orders
2.6 Heretical movements

2.6.1 Cathars
2.6.2 Waldensians




3 Trade and commerce
4 Science

4.1 Technology


5 Arts

5.1 Visual arts
5.2 Architecture
5.3 Literature
5.4 Music
5.5 Theatre


6 Timeline
7 See also
8 Notes
9 Further reading
10 External links


Historical events and politics[edit]
 Bayeux Tapestry depicting the Battle of Hastings during the Norman Conquest
Great Britain and Ireland[edit]
Main articles: England in the Middle Ages, Scotland in the High Middle Ages, and History of Gwynedd during the High Middle Ages
 The painted effigies of Eleanor of Aquitaine and Henry II of England from Fontevraud Abbey in Anjou, France; their remains are lost
In England, the Norman Conquest of 1066 resulted in a kingdom ruled by a Francophone nobility. The Normans invaded Ireland by force in 1169 and soon established themselves throughout most of the country, although their stronghold was the southeast. Likewise, Scotland and Wales were subdued to vassalage at about the same time, though Scotland later asserted its independence and Wales remained largely under the rule of independent native princes until the death of Llywelyn ap Gruffydd in 1282.[8] The Exchequer was founded in the 12th century under King Henry I, and the first parliaments were convened. In 1215, after the loss of Normandy, King John signed the Magna Carta into law, which limited the power of English monarchs.

Spain, Portugal, and Italy[edit]
Main articles: Spain in the Middle Ages and Italy in the Middle Ages
Much of the Iberian peninsula had been occupied by the Moors after 711, although the northernmost portion was divided between several Christian states. In the 11th century, and again in the thirteenth, the Christian kingdoms of the north gradually drove the Muslims from central and most of southern Iberia.
In Italy, independent city states grew affluent on eastern maritime trade. These were in particular the thalassocracies of Pisa, Amalfi, Genoa and Venice.

Scandinavia[edit]
Main articles: History of Denmark § Christianity, expansion and the establishment of the Kingdom of Denmark; History of Norway § The Viking kings; and Early Swedish history
From the mid-tenth to the mid-11th centuries, the Scandinavian kingdoms were unified and Christianized, resulting in an end of Viking raids, and greater involvement in European politics. King Cnut of Denmark ruled over both England and Norway. After Cnut's death in 1035, England and Norway were lost, and with the defeat of Valdemar II in 1227, Danish predominance in the region came to an end. Meanwhile, Norway extended its Atlantic possessions, ranging from Greenland to the Isle of Man, while Sweden, under Birger Jarl, built up a power-base in the Baltic Sea. However, the Norwegian influence started to decline already in the same period, marked by the Treaty of Perth of 1266. Also, civil wars raged in Norway between 1130 and 1240.

France and Germany[edit]
Main articles: France in the Middle Ages and Germany in the Middle Ages
 France in the 12th century. The Angevin Empire held the red, pink and orange territories.
By the time of the High Middle Ages, the Carolingian Empire had been divided and replaced by separate successor kingdoms called France and Germany, although not with their modern boundaries. Germany was under the banner of the Holy Roman Empire, which reached its high-water mark of unity and political power.

Georgia[edit]
Main article: Georgian Golden Age
During the successful reign of King David IV of Georgia (1089–1125), Kingdom of Georgia grew in strength and expelled the Seljuk Empire from its lands. David's decisive victory in the Battle of Didgori (1121) against the Seljuk Turks, as a result of which Georgia recaptured its lost capital Tbilisi, marked the beginning of the Georgian Golden Age. David's granddaughter Queen Tamar continued the upward rise, successfully neutralizing internal opposition and embarking on an energetic foreign policy aided by further decline of the hostile Seljuk Turks. Relying on a powerful military élite, Tamar was able to build on the successes of her predecessors to consolidate an empire which dominated vast lands spanning from present-day southern Russia on the Black Sea to the Caspian Sea. Georgia remained a leading regional power until its collapse under the Mongol attacks within two decades after Tamar's death.

Hungary[edit]
Main article: Kingdom of Hungary in the Middle Ages
 King Saint Stephen I of Hungary.
In the High Middle Ages, the Kingdom of Hungary (founded in 1000), became one of the most powerful medieval states in central Europe and Western Europe. King Saint Stephen I of Hungary introduced Christianity to the region; he was remembered by the contemporary chroniclers as a very religious monarch, with wide knowledge in Latin grammar, strict with his own people but kind to the foreigners. He eradicated the remnants of the tribal organisation in the Kingdom and forced the people to sedentarize and adopt the Christian religion, ethics, way of life and founded the Hungarian medieval state, organising it politically in counties using the Germanic system as a model.
The following monarchs usually kept a close relationship with Rome like Saint Ladislaus I of Hungary, and a tolerant attitude with the pagans that escaped to the Kingdom searching for sanctuary (for example Cumans in the 13th century), which eventually created certain discomfort for some Popes. With entering in Personal union with the Kingdom of Croatia and the establishment of other vassal states, Hungary became a small empire that extended its control over the Balkans and the Carpathian region. The Hungarian royal house was the one that gave the most saints to the Catholic Church during medieval times.

Lithuania[edit]
Main article: Grand Duchy of Lithuania
During the High Middle Ages Lithuania emerged as a Kingdom of Lithuania. After the assassination of its first Christian king Mindaugas Lithuania was known as Grand Duchy of Lithuania. Unconquered during the Lithuanian Crusade, Lithuania itself rapidly expanded to the East due to conquests and became one of the largest states in Europe.

Poland[edit]
Main article: History of Poland in the Middle Ages
During the High Middle Ages Poland emerged as a kingdom. It decided to bond itself with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, confirmed by the Union of Krewo and later treaties, leading to a personal union in 1569.

Southeastern Europe[edit]
 The Pontic steppes, c. 1015
Main articles: Byzantine Empire, Second Bulgarian Empire, Serbian Grand Principality, Principality of Arbanon, Banate of Bosnia, and Kingdom of Croatia
The High Middle Ages saw the height and decline of the Slavic state of Kievan Rus' and emergence of Cumania. Later, the Mongol invasion in the 13th century had great impact on the east of Europe, as many countries of the region were invaded, pillaged, conquered and/or vassalized.
During the first half of this period (c. 1025—1185) the Byzantine Empire dominated the Balkans, and under the Komnenian emperors there was a revival of prosperity and urbanization; however, their domination of Southeastern Europe came to an end with a successful Vlach-Bulgarian rebellion in 1185, and henceforth the region was divided between the Byzantines in Greece, some parts of Macedonia, and Thrace, the Bulgarians in Moesia and most of Thrace and Macedonia, and the Serbs to the northwest. Eastern and Western churches had formally split in the 11th century, and despite occasional periods of co-operation during the 12th century, in 1204 the Fourth Crusade treacherously captured Constantinople. This severely damaged the Byzantines, and their power was ultimately weakened by the Seljuks and the rising Ottoman Empire in the 14–15th century. The power of the Latin Empire, however, was short lived after the Crusader army was routed by Bulgarian Emperor Kaloyan in the Battle of Adrianople (1205).

Climate and agriculture[edit]
The Medieval Warm Period, the period from the 10th century to about the 14th century in Europe, was a relatively warm and gentle interval ended by the generally colder Little Ice Age. Farmers grew wheat well north into Scandinavia, and wine grapes in northern England, although the maximum expansion of vineyards appears to occur within the Little Ice Age period. During this time, a high demand for wine and steady volume of alcohol consumption inspired a viticulture revolution of progress.[9] This protection from famine allowed Europe's population to increase, despite the famine in 1315 that killed 1.5 million people. This increased population contributed to the founding of new towns and an increase in industrial and economic activity during the period. They also established trade and a comprehensive production of alcohol. Food production also increased during this time as new ways of farming were introduced, including the use of a heavier plow, horses instead of oxen, and a three-field system that allowed the cultivation of a greater variety of crops than the earlier two-field system—notably legumes, the growth of which prevented the depletion of important nitrogen from the soil.

The rise of chivalry[edit]
Household heavy cavalry (knights) became common in the 11th century across Europe, and tournaments were invented. Although the heavy capital investment in horse and armor was a barrier to entry, knighthood became known as a way for serfs to earn their freedom.[citation needed] In the 12th century, the Cluny monks promoted ethical warfare and inspired the formation of orders of chivalry, such as the Templar Knights. Inherited titles of nobility were established during this period. In 13th-century Germany, knighthood became another inheritable title, although one of the less prestigious, and the trend spread to other countries.

Religion[edit]
 The religious distribution after the East–West Schism in 1054
Christian Church[edit]
The East–West Schism of 1054 formally separated the Christian church into two parts: Roman Catholicism in Western Europe and Eastern Orthodoxy in the east. It occurred when Pope Leo IX and Patriarch Michael I excommunicated each other, mainly over disputes as to the use of unleavened bread in the liturgy and fasting days, existence of papal authority over the four Eastern patriarchs, as well as disagreement over the filioque.

Crusades[edit]
Main article: Crusades
 After the successful siege of Jerusalem in 1099, Godfrey of Bouillon, leader of the First Crusade, became the first ruler of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.
The Catholic Crusades occurred between the 11th and 13th centuries. They were conducted under papal authority, initially with the intent of reestablishing Christian rule in The Holy Land by taking the area from the Muslim Fatimid Caliphate. The Fatimids had captured Palestine in AD 970, lost it to the Seljuk Turks in 1073 and recaptured it in 1098, just before they lost it again in 1099 as a result of the First Crusade.

Military orders[edit]
In the context of the crusades, monastic military orders were founded that would become the template for the late medieval chivalric orders.
The Knights Templar were a Christian military order founded after the First Crusade to help protect Christian pilgrims from hostile locals and highway bandits. The order was deeply involved in banking, and in 1307 Philip the Fair (Philippine le Bel) had the entire order arrested in France and dismantled on charges of heresy.
The Knights Hospitaller were originally a Christian organization founded in Jerusalem in 1080 to provide care for poor, sick, or injured pilgrims to the Holy Land. After Jerusalem was taken in the First Crusade, it became a religious/military order that was charged with the care and defence of the Holy Lands. After the Holy Lands were eventually taken by Muslim forces, it moved its operations to Rhodes, and later Malta.
The Teutonic Knights were a German religious order formed in 1190, in the city of Acre, to aid Christian pilgrims on their way to the Holy Lands and to operate hospitals for the sick and injured in Outremer. After Muslim forces captured the Holy Lands, the order moved to Transylvania in 1211 and later, after being expelled, invaded pagan Prussia with the intention of Christianizing the Baltic region. Yet, both before and after the Order's main pagan opponent, Lithuania, converted to Christianity, the Order had already attacked other Christian nations such as Novgorod and Poland. The Teutonic Knights' power hold, which became considerable, was broken in 1410, at the Battle of Grunwald, where the Order suffered a devastating defeat against a joint Polish-Lithuanian army. After Grunwald, the Order declined in power until 1809 when it was officially dissolved.  There were ten crusades in total.

Scholasticism[edit]
Main article: Scholasticism
The new Christian method of learning was influenced by Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109) from the rediscovery of the works of Aristotle, at first indirectly through Medieval Jewish and Muslim Philosophy (Maimonides, Avicenna, and Averroes) and then through Aristotle's own works brought back from Byzantine and Muslim libraries; and those whom he influenced, most notably Albertus Magnus, Bonaventure and Abélard. Many scholastics believed in empiricism and supporting Roman Catholic doctrines through secular study, reason, and logic. They opposed Christian mysticism, and the Platonist-Augustinian belief that the mind is an immaterial substance. The most famous of the scholastics was Thomas Aquinas (later declared a "Doctor of the Church"), who led the move away from the Platonic and Augustinian and towards Aristotelianism. Aquinas developed a philosophy of mind by writing that the mind was at birth a tabula rasa ("blank slate") that was given the ability to think and recognize forms or ideas through a divine spark. Other notable scholastics included Muhammad Averroes, Roscelin, Abélard, Peter Lombard, and Francisco Suárez. One of the main questions during this time was the problem of universals. Prominent opponents of various aspects of the scholastic mainstream included Duns Scotus, William of Ockham, Peter Damian, Bernard of Clairvaux, and the Victorines. [1]

Golden age of monasticism[edit]
The late 11th century/early-mid 12th century was the height of the golden age of Christian monasticism (8th-12th centuries).
Benedictine Order – black-robed monks
Cistercian Order – white-robed monks
Bernard of Clairvaux
Mendicant orders[edit]
The 13th century saw the rise of the Mendicant orders such as the:
Franciscans (Friars Minor, commonly known as the Grey Friars), founded 1209
Carmelites (Hermits of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Carmel, commonly known as the White Friars), founded 1206–1214
Dominicans (Order of Preachers, commonly called the Black Friars), founded 1215
Augustinians (Hermits of St. Augustine, commonly called the Austin Friars), founded 1256
Heretical movements[edit]
Christian heresies existed in Europe before the 11th century but only in small numbers and of local character: in most cases, a rogue priest, or a village returning to pagan traditions. Beginning in the 11th century, however mass-movement heresies appeared. The roots of this can be partially sought in the rise of urban cities, free merchants, and a new money-based economy. The rural values of monasticism held little appeal to urban people who began to form sects more in tune with urban culture. The first large-scale heretical movements in Western Europe originated in the newly urbanized areas such as southern France and northern Italy and were probably influenced by the Bogomils and other dualist movements. These heresies were on a scale the Catholic Church had never seen before; the response was one of elimination for some (such as the Cathars), and acceptance and integration of others (such as the veneration of Francis of Assisi, the son of an urban merchant who renounced money).

Cathars[edit]
 Cathars being expelled from Carcassonne in 1209
Main article: Catharism
Catharism was a movement with Gnostic elements that originated around the middle of the 10th century, branded by the contemporary Roman Catholic Church as heretical. It existed throughout much of Western Europe, but its origination was in Languedoc and surrounding areas in southern France.
The name Cathar stems from Greek katharos, "pure". One of the first recorded uses is Eckbert von Schönau who wrote on heretics from Cologne in 1181: "Hos nostra Germania catharos appellat."
The Cathars are also called Albigensians. This name originates from the end of the 12th century, and was used by the chronicler Geoffroy du Breuil of Vigeois in 1181. The name refers to the southern town of Albi (the ancient Albiga). The designation is hardly exact, for the centre was at Toulouse and in the neighbouring districts.
The Albigensians were strong in southern France, northern Italy, and the southwestern Holy Roman Empire.
The Bogomils were strong in the Balkans, and became the official religion supported by the Bosnian kings.

Dualists believed that historical events were the result of struggle between a good force and an evil force and that evil ruled the world, though it could be controlled or defeated through asceticism and good works.
Albigensian Crusade, Simon de Montfort, Montségur, Château de Quéribus
Waldensians[edit]
Peter Waldo of Lyon was a wealthy merchant who gave up his riches around 1175 after a religious experience and became a preacher. He founded the Waldensians which became a Christian sect believing that all religious practices should have scriptural basis. Waldo was denied the right to preach his sermons by the Third Lateran Council in 1179, which he did not obey and continued to speak freely until he was excommunicated in 1184. Waldo was critical of the Christian clergy saying they did not live according to the word. He rejected the practice of selling indulgences, as well as the common saint cult practices of the day.
Waldensians are considered a forerunner to the Protestant Reformation, and they melted into Protestantism with the outbreak of the Reformation and became a part of the wider Reformed tradition after the views of John Calvin and his theological successors in Geneva proved very similar to their own theological thought. Waldensian churches still exist, located on several continents.

Trade and commerce[edit]
In Northern Europe, the Hanseatic League, a federation of free cities to advance trade by sea, was founded in the 12th century, with the foundation of the city of Lübeck, which would later dominate the League, in 1158–1159. Many northern cities of the Holy Roman Empire became hanseatic cities, including Amsterdam, Cologne, Bremen, Hanover and Berlin. Hanseatic cities outside the Holy Roman Empire were, for instance, Bruges and the Polish city of Gdańsk (Danzig), as well as Königsberg, capital of the monastic state of the Teutonic Knights.  In Bergen, Norway and Veliky Novgorod, Russia the league had factories and middlemen. In this period the Germans started colonising Europe beyond the Empire, into Prussia and Silesia.
In the late 13th century, a Venetian explorer named Marco Polo became one of the first Europeans to travel the Silk Road to China. Westerners became more aware of the Far East when Polo documented his travels in Il Milione. He was followed by numerous Christian missionaries to the East, such as William of Rubruck, Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, André de Longjumeau, Odoric of Pordenone, Giovanni de' Marignolli, Giovanni di Monte Corvino, and other travellers such as Niccolò de' Conti.

Science[edit]
Main articles: Science in the Middle Ages and Medieval medicine of Western Europe
Further information: List of medieval European scientists
 A map of medieval universities and major monasteries with library in 1250
Philosophical and scientific teaching of the Early Middle Ages was based upon few copies and commentaries of ancient Greek texts that remained in Western Europe after the collapse of the Western Roman Empire. Most of them were studied only in Latin as knowledge of Greek was very limited.
This scenario changed during the Renaissance of the 12th century. The intellectual revitalization of Europe started with the birth of medieval universities. The increased contact with the Islamic world in Spain and Sicily during the Reconquista, and the Byzantine world and Muslim Levant during the Crusades, allowed Europeans access to scientific Arabic and Greek texts, including the works of Aristotle, Alhazen, and Averroes. The European universities aided materially in the translation and propagation of these texts and started a new infrastructure which was needed for scientific communities.

 Detail of a portrait of Hugh de Provence (wearing spectacles), painted by Tommaso da Modena in 1352
At the beginning of the 13th century there were reasonably accurate Latin translations of the main works of almost all the intellectually crucial ancient authors,[10] allowing a sound transfer of scientific ideas via both the universities and the monasteries. By then, the natural science contained in these texts began to be extended by notable scholastics such as Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus and Duns Scotus. Precursors of the modern scientific method can be seen already in Grosseteste's emphasis on mathematics as a way to understand nature, and in the empirical approach admired by Bacon, particularly in his Opus Majus.

Technology[edit]
Main articles: Medieval technology and Artes Mechanicae
During the 12th and 13th century in Europe there was a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth. In less than a century there were more inventions developed and applied usefully than in the previous thousand years of human history all over the globe. The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption or invention of windmills, watermills, printing (though not yet with movable type), gunpowder, the astrolabe, glasses, scissors of the modern shape, a better clock, and greatly improved ships. The latter two advances made possible the dawn of the Age of Discovery. These inventions were influenced by foreign culture and society.
Alfred W. Crosby described some of this technological revolution in The Measure of Reality: Quantification in Western Europe, 1250-1600 and other major historians of technology have also noted it.

 Ships of the world in 1460, according to the Fra Mauro map.
The earliest written record of a windmill is from Yorkshire, England, dated 1185.
Paper manufacture began in Italy around 1270.
The spinning wheel was brought to Europe (probably from India) in the 13th century.
The magnetic compass aided navigation, first reaching Europe some time in the late 12th century.
Eye glasses were invented in Italy in the late 1280s.
The astrolabe returned to Europe via Islamic Spain.
Fibonacci introduces Hindu-Arabic numerals to Europe with his book Liber Abaci in 1202.
The West's oldest known depiction of a stern-mounted rudder can be found on church carvings dating to around 1180.
Arts[edit]
Visual arts[edit]
 Fresco from the Boyana Church depicting Emperor Constantine Tikh Asen. The murals are among the finest achievements of the Bulgarian culture in the 13th century.
Main article: Medieval art
Art in the High Middle Ages includes these important movements:

Anglo-Saxon art was influential on the British Isles until the Norman Invasion of 1066
Romanesque art continued traditions from the Classical world (not to be confused with Romanesque architecture)
Gothic art developed a distinct Germanic flavor (not to be confused with Gothic architecture).
Indo-Islamic architecture begins when Muhammad of Ghor made Delhi a Muslim capital
Byzantine art continued earlier Byzantine traditions, influencing much of Eastern Europe.
Illuminated manuscripts gained prominence both in the Catholic and Orthodox churches
Architecture[edit]
 Interior of Nôtre Dame de Paris
Main article: Gothic architecture
Gothic architecture superseded the Romanesque style by combining flying buttresses, gothic (or pointed) arches and ribbed vaults. It was influenced by the spiritual background of the time, being religious in essence: thin horizontal lines and grates made the building strive towards the sky. Architecture was made to appear light and weightless, as opposed to the dark and bulky forms of the previous Romanesque style. Saint Augustine of Hippo taught that light was an expression of God. Architectural techniques were adapted and developed to build churches that reflected this teaching. Colorful glass windows enhanced the spirit of lightness. As color was much rarer at medieval times than today, it can be assumed that these virtuoso works of art had an awe-inspiring impact on the common man from the street. High-rising intricate ribbed, and later fan vaultings demonstrated movement toward heaven. Veneration of God was also expressed by the relatively large size of these buildings. A gothic cathedral therefore not only invited the visitors to elevate themselves spiritually, it was also meant to demonstrate the greatness of God. The floor plan of a gothic cathedral corresponded to the rules of scholasticism: According to Erwin Panofsky's Gothic Architecture and Scholasticism, the plan was divided into sections and uniform subsections. These characteristics are exhibited by the most famous sacral building of the time: Notre Dame de Paris.

Literature[edit]
Main article: Medieval literature
 John the Apostle and Marcion of Sinope in an Italian illuminated manuscript, painting on vellum, 11th century
A variety of cultures influenced the literature of the High Middle Ages, one of the strongest among them being Christianity. The connection to Christianity was greatest in Latin literature, which influenced the vernacular languages in the literary cycle of the Matter of Rome. Other literary cycles, or interrelated groups of stories, included the Matter of France (stories about Charlemagne and his court), the Acritic songs dealing with the chivalry of Byzantium's frontiersmen, and perhaps the best known cycle, the Matter of Britain, which featured tales about King Arthur, his court, and related stories from Brittany, Cornwall, Wales and Ireland. An anonymous German poet tried to bring the Germanic myths from the Migration Period to the level of the French and British epics, producing the Nibelungenlied. There was also a quantity of poetry and historical writings which were written during this period, such as Historia Regum Britanniae by Geoffrey of Monmouth.
Despite political decline during the late 12th and much of the 13th centuries, the Byzantine scholarly tradition remained particularly fruitful over the time period. One of the most prominent philosophers of the 11th century, Michael Psellos, reinvigorated Neoplatonism on Christian foundations and bolstered the study of ancient philosophical texts, along with contributing to history, grammar, and rhetorics. His pupil and successor at the head of Philosophy at the University of Constantinople Ioannes Italos continued the Platonic line in Byzantine thought and was criticized by the Church for holding opinions it considered heretical, such as the doctrine of transmigration. Two Orthodox theologians important in the dialogue between the eastern and western churches were Nikephoros Blemmydes and Maximus Planudes. Byzantine historical tradition also flourished with the works of the brothers Niketas and Michael Choniates in the beginning of the 13th century and George Akropolites a generation later. Dating from 12th century Byzantine Empire is also Timarion, an Orthodox Christian anticipation of Divine Comedy. Around the same time the so-called Byzantine novel rose in popularity with its synthesis of ancient pagan and contemporaneous Christian themes.
At the same time southern France gave birth to Occitan literature, which is best known for troubadours who sang of courtly love. It included elements from Latin literature and Arab-influenced Spain and North Africa. Later its influence spread to several cultures in Western Europe, notably in Portugal and the Minnesänger in Germany. Provençal literature also reached Sicily and Northern Italy laying the foundation of the "sweet new style" of Dante and later Petrarca. Indeed, the most important poem of the Late Middle Ages, the allegorical Divine Comedy, is to a large degree a product of both the theology of Thomas Aquinas and the largely secular Occitan literature.

Music[edit]
Main article: Medieval music
 Musicians playing the Spanish vihuela, one with a bow, the other plucked by hand, in the Cantigas de Santa Maria of Alfonso X of Castile, 13th century
 Men playing the organistrum, from the Ourense Cathedral, Spain, 12th century
The surviving music of the High Middle Ages is primarily religious in nature, since music notation developed in religious institutions, and the application of notation to secular music was a later development. Early in the period, Gregorian chant was the dominant form of church music; other forms, beginning with organum, and later including clausulae, conductus, and the motet, developed using the chant as source material.
During the 11th century, Guido of Arezzo was one of the first to develop musical notation, which made it easier for singers to remember Gregorian chants.
It was during the 12th and 13th centuries that Gregorian plainchant gave birth to polyphony, which appeared in the works of French Notre Dame School (Léonin and Pérotin). Later it evolved into the ars nova (Philippe de Vitry, Guillaume de Machaut) and the musical genres of late Middle Ages. An important composer during the 12th century was the nun Hildegard of Bingen.
The most significant secular movement was that of the troubadours, who arose in Occitania (Southern France) in the late 11th century. The troubadours were often itinerant, came from all classes of society, and wrote songs on a variety of topics, though with a particular focus on courtly love. Their style went on to influence the trouvères of northern France, the minnesingers of Germany, and the composers of secular music of the Trecento in northern Italy.

Theatre[edit]
Main article: Medieval theatre
Economic and political changes in the High Middle Ages led to the formation of guilds and the growth of towns, and this would lead to significant changes for theatre starting in this time and continuing into the Late Middle Ages. Trade guilds began to perform plays, usually religiously based, and often dealing with a biblical story that referenced their profession. For instance, a baker's guild would perform a reenactment of the Last Supper.[11]  In the British Isles, plays were produced in some 127 different towns during the Middle Ages. These vernacular Mystery plays were written in cycles of a large number of plays: York (48 plays), Chester (24), Wakefield (32) and Unknown (42). A larger number of plays survive from France and Germany in this period and some type of religious dramas were performed in nearly every European country in the Late Middle Ages. Many of these plays contained comedy, devils, villains and clowns.[12]
There were also a number of secular performances staged in the Middle Ages, the earliest of which is The Play of the Greenwood by Adam de la Halle in 1276. It contains satirical scenes and folk material such as faeries and other supernatural occurrences. Farces also rose dramatically in popularity after the 13th century. The majority of these plays come from France and Germany and are similar in tone and form, emphasizing sex and bodily excretions.[13]

Timeline[edit]
Further information: Timeline of the Middle Ages
 The cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris, whose construction began in 1163, is one of the finer examples of the High Middle Ages architecture
.mw-parser-output .div-col{margin-top:0.3em;column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .div-col-small{font-size:90%}.mw-parser-output .div-col-rules{column-rule:1px solid #aaa}.mw-parser-output .div-col dl,.mw-parser-output .div-col ol,.mw-parser-output .div-col ul{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .div-col li,.mw-parser-output .div-col dd{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}
1003 – death of Pope Sylvester II
1018 – the First Bulgarian Empire is conquered by the Byzantine Empire under Basil II.
1027 – the Salian Conrad II succeeds the last Ottonian Henry II the Saint
1054 – East–West Schism
1066 – Battle of Hastings
1066–1067 Bayeux Tapestry
1073–1085 – Pope Gregory VII
1071 – Battle of Manzikert
1077 – Henry IV's Walk to Canossa
1086 – Domesday Book
1086 – Battle of az-Zallaqah
1088 – University of Bologna founded
1091 – Battle of Levounion
1096–1099 – First Crusade
1123 – First Lateran Council
1139 – Second Lateran Council
1145–1149 – Second Crusade
1147 – Wendish Crusade
c. 1150 – University of Paris founded
1155–1190 – Frederick I Barbarossa
1158 – foundation of the Hanseatic League
1167 – University of Oxford founded
1169 - Norman invasion of Ireland
1185 – reestablishment of the Bulgarian Empire
1189–1192 – Third Crusade
1200–1204 – Fourth Crusade
1205 – battle of Adrianople
1209 – University of Cambridge founded
1209 – foundation of the Franciscan Order
1209–1229 – Albigensian Crusade
1212 – Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa
1215 – Magna Carta
1216 – recognition of the Dominican Order
1215 – Fourth Lateran Council
1217–1221 – Fifth Crusade
1218 – University of Salamanca founded
1220–1250 – Frederick II
1222 – University of Padua founded
1223 – approval of the Franciscan Rule of Life
1228–1229 – Sixth Crusade
1230 – Prussian Crusade
1230 – battle of Klokotnitsa
1237–1242 – Mongol invasion of Europe
1241 – Battle of Legnica and Battle of Mohi
1242 – Battle of the Ice
1248–1254 – Seventh Crusade
1257 – foundation of the Collège de Sorbonne
1261 – the Byzantine Empire reconquers Constantinople.
1274 – death of Thomas Aquinas; Summa Theologica published
1277-1280 – Uprising of Ivaylo – Medieval Europe's only successful peasant uprising
1280 – death of Albertus Magnus
1291 – Acre, the last European outpost in the Near East, is captured by the Mamluks under Khalil.
1299 – Peak of Mongol supremacy in Southeastern Europe with Chaka of Bulgaria
1299 – Osman I founds the Ottoman Empire.

See also[edit]
Early Middle Ages
Late Middle Ages
Middle Ages
Notes[edit]
.mw-parser-output .reflist{font-size:90%;margin-bottom:0.5em;list-style-type:decimal}.mw-parser-output .reflist .references{font-size:100%;margin-bottom:0;list-style-type:inherit}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-2{column-width:30em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns-3{column-width:25em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns{margin-top:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns ol{margin-top:0}.mw-parser-output .reflist-columns li{page-break-inside:avoid;break-inside:avoid-column}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-alpha{list-style-type:upper-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-upper-roman{list-style-type:upper-roman}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-alpha{list-style-type:lower-alpha}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-greek{list-style-type:lower-greek}.mw-parser-output .reflist-lower-roman{list-style-type:lower-roman}

^ John H. Mundy, Europe in the high Middle Ages, 1150-1309 (1973) online

^ Reitervölker im Frühmittelalter. Bodo, Anke et.al. Stuttgart 2008

^ .mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation q{quotes:"\"""\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-free a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/6/65/Lock-green.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .id-lock-registration a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .id-lock-subscription a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg")right 0.1em center/9px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration{color:#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon a{background:linear-gradient(transparent,transparent),url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg")right 0.1em center/12px no-repeat}.mw-parser-output code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:none;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-maint{display:none;color:#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}.mw-parser-output .citation .mw-selflink{font-weight:inherit}"Politics and power early medieval europe alsace and frankish realm 6001000 | European history: general interest". Cambridge University Press.

^ 
See for example: 
Aberth, John (2012). "The early medieval woodland". An Environmental History of the Middle Ages: The Crucible of Nature. Abingdon: Routledge. p. 87. ISBN 9780415779456. Retrieved 2017-08-17. The French historian of the early medieval forest, Charles Higounet, produced a map in the 1960s, which has been much reproduced since, that purports to show the distribution of the forest cover in Europe on the eve of the so-called 'great clearances' (les grands défrichements) between 1000 and 1300.

^ Taylor 2005, p. 181. sfn error: no target: CITEREFTaylor2005 (help)

^ Adamson 2016, p. 180. sfn error: no target: CITEREFAdamson2016 (help)

^ Fakhry 2001, p. 3. sfn error: no target: CITEREFFakhry2001 (help)

^ Davies, Rees (2001-05-01). "Wales: A Culture Preserved". bbc.co.uk/history. p. 3. Retrieved 2008-05-06.

^ Jellinek, E. M. 1976. "Drinkers and Alcoholics in Ancient Rome." Edited by Carole D. Yawney andRobert E. Popham. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 37 (11): 1718–1740.

^ Franklin, J., "The Renaissance myth", Quadrant 26 (11) (Nov, 1982), 51-60. (Retrieved on-line at 06-07-2007)

^ A History of English literature for Students, by Robert Huntington Fletcher, 1916: pp. 85–88

^ Brockett and Hildy (2003, 86)

^ Brockett and Hildy (2003, 96)


Further reading[edit]
Fuhrmann, Horst. Germany in the High Middle Ages: c. 1050-1200 (Cambridge UP,  1986).
Jordan, William C.  Europe in the High Middle Ages (2nd ed. Penguin, 2004).
Mundy, John H. Europe in the High Middle Ages, 1150–1309 (2014)--online
Power, Daniel, ed. The Central Middle Ages: Europe 950–1320 (Oxford UP, 2006).
External links[edit]



Wikimedia Commons has media related to High Middle Ages.

Music of the Middle Ages: 475-1500
Middle Ages: The High Middle Ages in the Columbia Encyclopedia at Infoplease
Provençal literature in the Columbia Encyclopedia at Infoplease
.mw-parser-output .navbar{display:inline;font-size:88%;font-weight:normal}.mw-parser-output .navbar-collapse{float:left;text-align:left}.mw-parser-output .navbar-boxtext{word-spacing:0}.mw-parser-output .navbar ul{display:inline-block;white-space:nowrap;line-height:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::before{margin-right:-0.125em;content:"[ "}.mw-parser-output .navbar-brackets::after{margin-left:-0.125em;content:" ]"}.mw-parser-output .navbar li{word-spacing:-0.125em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-mini abbr{font-variant:small-caps;border-bottom:none;text-decoration:none;cursor:inherit}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-full{font-size:114%;margin:0 7em}.mw-parser-output .navbar-ct-mini{font-size:114%;margin:0 4em}.mw-parser-output .infobox .navbar{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox .navbar{display:block;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output .navbox-title .navbar{float:left;text-align:left;margin-right:0.5em}vteEuropean Middle AgesEarly Middle Ages
Migration Period
Decline of the Western Roman Empire
Late antiquity
Decline of Hellenistic religion
Christianization
Rise of Islam
Papal States
First Bulgarian Empire
Frankish Empire
Kingdom of Croatia
Anglo-Saxon England
Viking Age
Carolingian Empire
Old Church Slavonic
Rise of the Venetian Republic
Civitas Schinesghe
Kievan Rus'
Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire
High Middle Ages
Holy Roman Empire
Second Bulgarian Empire
Georgian Empire
Kingdom of Poland
Feudalism
Rise of the Republic of Genoa
Great Schism
Investiture Controversy
Crusades
Republic of Florence
Scholasticism
Monasticism
Communalism
Manorialism
Medieval Warm Period
Mongol invasion of Europe
Late Middle Ages
Hundred Years' War
Wars of the Roses
Hussite Wars
Burgundy
Milan
House of Habsburg
Western Schism
Fall of Constantinople
Rise of the Ottoman Empire
Swiss mercenaries
Chivalry
Renaissance Humanism
Universities
Crisis of the Late Middle Ages
Little Ice Age
Culture
Architecture
Art
Church and State
Cuisine
Dance
Demography
Household
Literature
Medicine
Music
Philosophy
Poetry
Science
Slavery
Technology
Warfare
See also
Dark Ages
Disability in the Middle Ages
Basic topics list
Medievalism
Medieval reenactment
Medieval studies
Neo-medievalism
Timeline
Global history of same period of time

 Portal
 Category
 WikiProject

vteHistory of EuropePrehistory
Paleolithic Europe
Neolithic Europe
Bronze Age Europe
Iron Age Europe
Classical antiquity
Classical Greece
Roman Republic
Hellenistic period
Roman Empire
Early Christianity
Christianity in late antiquity
Crisis of the Third Century
Fall of the Western Roman Empire
Late antiquity
Middle Ages
Early Middle Ages
Migration Period
Christianity in the Middle Ages
Christianization
Francia
Byzantine Empire
Papal States
Bulgarian Empire
First
Second
Maritime republics
Venice
Genoa
Pisa
Amalfi
Viking Age
Kievan Rus'
Crown of Aragon
Holy Roman Empire
High Middle Ages
Republic of Florence
Feudalism
Crusades
Mongol invasion
Serbian Empire
Late Middle Ages
Black Death
Hundred Years' War
Kalmar Union
Early modern
Renaissance
Christianity in the modern era
Reformation
Age of Discovery
Baroque
Grand Duchy of Tuscany
Thirty Years' War
Absolute monarchy
Ottoman Empire
Portuguese Empire
Spanish Empire
Early modern France
Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
Cossack Hetmanate
Swedish Empire
Dutch Republic
British Empire
Habsburg Monarchy
Russian Empire
Age of Enlightenment
Modern
Great Divergence
Industrial Revolution
French Revolution
Napoleonic Wars
Nationalism
Revolutions of 1848
World War I
Russian Revolution
Interwar period
World War II
Cold War
European integration
COVID-19 pandemic
See also
Art of Europe
Genetic history of Europe
History of Christianity
History of the Mediterranean region
History of the European Union
History of Western civilization
Maritime history of Europe
Military history of Europe

Middle Ages portalHistory portalChristianity portalWar portal
Authority control 
GND: 7503822-5

 
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1353
Cached time: 20210402200635
Cache expiry: 2592000
Dynamic content: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.897 seconds
Real time usage: 1.229 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3944/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 118027/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25860/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/40
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42256/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.369/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6695934/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400


Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  887.692      1 -total
 20.22%  179.507      1 Template:Multiple_image
 18.49%  164.155      1 Template:Reflist
 16.51%  146.537      2 Template:Plainlist
 13.95%  123.849     64 Template:Color_box
 13.57%  120.471      1 Template:Cite_web
  9.52%   84.484     62 Template:Greater_color_contrast_ratio
  9.37%   83.203      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.92%   79.200      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.46%   75.116      1 Template:Side_box

 Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:503345-0!canonical and timestamp 20210402200634 and revision id 1014999521. Serialized with JSON.
 

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=High_Middle_Ages&oldid=1014999521"
Categories: High Middle AgesMiddle Ages11th century in Europe12th century in Europe13th century in Europe11th-century establishments in Europe13th-century disestablishments in EuropeHidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errorsUse Oxford spelling from April 2020Articles with short descriptionShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2018Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013Commons category link is on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiers






Navigation menu

 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Personal tools


Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in



 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Namespaces


ArticleTalk


 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 



Variants







 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Views


ReadEditView history


 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 



More







Search
















 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Navigation


Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate


 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Contribute


HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file


 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Tools


What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item


 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Print/export


Download as PDFPrintable version


 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


In other projects


Wikimedia Commons


 Please do not use role attribute as CSS selector, it is deprecated. 


Languages


العربيةБеларускаяБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEestiEspañolEsperantoEuskaraفارسیFrançais한국어Bahasa IndonesiaÍslenskaItalianoעבריתქართულიМакедонскиNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålNorsk nynorskPortuguêsRumantschРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文
Edit links






 This page was last edited on 30 March 2021, at 04:17 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement









